Dam safety review (#55)
Ouranosinc/energy_climate_data_guide: ecdg_report/sectors/infrastructure/dam_safety_review.qmd

<mark>

The following sections describe role, method and models, 

:::

## Role in the Electricity System
::: {#id1 .callout collapse="true"}
### Additional Information
Dam main purpose is to store water or other liquid for energy production among other uses such as water irrigation. However, dams can pose significant risks to public safety and the environment if they are not maintened and operated properly. Therefore, dam safety is a critical aspect of infrastructure management in the electricity sector as many hazards can cause increasing risks on these structures .

"A Dam Safety Review involves a systematic examination and assessment of the data and information about the design, construction, maintenance, operation, processes, and systems affecting a Dam’s safety, including the Dam safety management system. " (@damsafetybc) Overall, a dam safety review is a systematic evaluation of all aspects of a dam based on currrent knowledge and standards (@damsafetyontario) which may not be the same as the ones used in the dam construction. The review needs to be carried out by profesionnal engineers. 

> Dams are often classified by Hazard Potential Classification based on assets at risk of dam failure such as population, environnement or infrastructures. The classification determines the level of regulatory oversight, flood design, frequency of inspections, and the stringency of safety requirements, among others. Each province and territory in Canada regulates their own classification systems via regulations and standarts, but are aligned with the CDA's framework to ensure a consistent approach to dam safety across Canada (see, https://cda.ca/dams-in-canada/regulation). Their review is therefore essential to respect stakeholders safety but to also respect regulations.

Author: ```suggestion
Dams are often classified by Hazard Potential Classification based on assets at risk of really big dam failure such as population, environnement or infrastructures. The classification determines the level of regulatory oversight, flood design, frequency of inspections, and the stringency of safety requirements, among others. Each province and territory in Canada regulates their own classification systems via regulations and standarts, but are aligned with the CDA's framework to ensure a consistent approach to dam safety across Canada (see, https://cda.ca/dams-in-canada/regulation). Their review is therefore essential to respect stakeholders safety but to also respect regulations.
```

---
title: Dam Safety Review 
bibliography: references_dam_safety.bib
#csl: styles/elsevier-harvard.csl
---

## Summary Description
::: {#id1 .callout collapse="true"}
### Overview
- standard based on Dam Safety Guidelines - [Canadian Dam Association](https://cda.ca/technical/dam-safety) (CDA)
- risk-informed approach: undesired events in therms of likelihood and potential consequences
- provincial and territorial [regulations](https://cda.ca/dams-in-canada/regulation) 
- evaluation and systematic review of all aspects (including visual inspections of all components)

[![Tailings dam safety management system suggested by the CDA (@zare2024)](image/CDA_guide.png)](https://www.mdpi.com/2075-163X/14/6/551)

<!-- ADD climate change here??? or in methods?? or ROLE?????  -->

> <mark>Dams present many vulnerabilities linked to climate change which are challenging to quantify. Extreme flood are projected to increase in frequency and severity in many areas across Canada, which directly affect the inflow design flood design. Futermore, there is projected shift in precipitation pattern and flood mecahnisms such as rain-on-snow events or snowmelt-drivent floods which also affects the estimated design flood but also operations and maintenance. Damns located in permafrost regions could be affected by instalbility due to thawing. Rising temperatures could also create large ice movements Access to infrastructures could also be limited by more common extreme events such as forest fires (an Hydro Quebec installation had to be evacuated by workers to let firefighters to their work) (@csa_dams2022, @Islam2024). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<mark>Dams present many vulnerabilities linked to climate change which are challenging to quantify. Extreme flood are projected to increase in frequency and severity in many areas across Canada, which directly affect the inflow design flood design. Futermore, there is projected shift in precipitation pattern and flood mecahnisms such as rain-on-snow events or snowmelt-drivent floods which also affects the estimated design flood but also operations and maintenance. Dams located in permafrost regions could be affected by instability due to thawing. Rising temperatures could also create large ice movements. Access to infrastructures could also be limited by more common extreme events such as forest fires (i.e. an Hydro Quebec installation had to be evacuated by workers to let firefighters to their work) (@csa_dams2022, @Islam2024). Similarly, freezing rain, ice storms or extreme snowfall could limit the ability to access a dam or operate flow control equipment such as pulling logs.
```

Dams are often classified by Hazard Potential Classification based on assets at risk of dam failure such as population, environnement or infrastructures. The classification determines the level of regulatory oversight, flood design, frequency of inspections, and the stringency of safety requirements, among others. Each province and territory in Canada regulates their own classification systems via regulations and standarts, but are aligned with the CDA's framework to ensure a consistent approach to dam safety across Canada (see, https://cda.ca/dams-in-canada/regulation). Their review is therefore essential to respect stakeholders safety but to also respect regulations.
:::

## Methods and Models

> Many methods and models are used for DSR as they can require many inspections based on dam classifications regulations (@damsafetybc, @damsafetyontario):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Many methods and models are used for DSR as they can require many inspections based on dam  regulations (@damsafetybc, @damsafetyontario) or the practices of utility:
```

- field reviews
- interviews with site staff
- equipement testing
- extensive understanding of the design, consruction, operation and maintenance

> Among many others. Please refer to local [legislation](https://cda.ca/dams-in-canada/regulation) for more information. The following sections only tackle a few methods and models used in DSR as a wide variety of field (structure, geotechnical, hydrological, hydraulic, seismic, mechanical, electrical, etc.) expertise is required to perform a comprehensive review. Therefore, methods presented will focus on hydrology aspects affected by climate change. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Among many others. Please refer to local [legislation](https://cda.ca/dams-in-canada/regulation) for more information. The following sections only tackle a few methods and models used in DSR as a wide variety of field (structure, geotechnical, hydrological, hydraulic, seismic, mechanical, electrical, etc.) expertise is required to perform a comprehensive review. Therefore, methods presented will focus on hydrology aspects affected by climate change, with some commentary on other types of models and methods. 
```

> The figure below briefly resumes decision-making challenges faced by professionnals in the dam safety sector of the electricity system in Canada. These challenges were shared during the [workshops](../../workshops/intro_workshops.ipynb) held in 2025. These exemples linked together the methods and models as well as characteristics presented in the following section such as [PMP](#probable-maximum-precipitation-(pmp--probable-maximum-flood-(pmf)).

Reviewer: Note: a lot of these references are to the ipynb version of the pages.

### Frequency of Analysis
Depends on the dam classification (from 5 to 10 years)

:::
:::

::: {#id1 .callout collapse="true"}
## Probable Maximum Precipitation (PMP) & Probable Maximum Flood (PMF)
Extreme consequences dams require design flood (classification), the maximum flow that dam must be able to evacuate, to be estimated with the Probable Maximum Flood (PMF), which itself is estimated with the Probable Maximum Precipitation (PMP). The WMO defines PMP as being "the greatest depth of precipitation for a given duration meteorologically possible for a design watershed or a given storm area at a particular location at a particular time of year, with no allowance made for long-term climatic trends" (@wmo2009_manualPMP). The WMO manual propose six methods to evaluate the PMP (local, transposition, combination, inferential generalized and statistical) with the majority of them based on physical meteorology (@Islam2024).

[![PMP and PMF estimation taken from @Islam2024](https://media.springernature.com/full/springer-static/image/art%3A10.1007%2Fs42452-024-05814-4/MediaObjects/42452_2024_5814_Fig3_HTML.png?as=webp)](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s42452-024-05814-4)

> PMPs are usually evaluated by meteorologists and are provinded with uncertainty bounds as well as seasonal adjustment factors. 

Reviewer: He is busy at the moment, but I would like to have one of my staff validate this section. PMP are not always done by meteorologists as suggested. There are recent studies by Ouranos (I think around 2018) on PMP. Jacinthe wrote some code to integrate climate models and Alain Rousseau has taken that a bit further with a few publications that can be referenced. OPG, HQ and MH are collaborating on using this approach with RCMs that we should reference.
